---
layout: post
title: "Just commit more!"
date: 2022-10-04
categories:
 - git
 - programming
 - rust
 - open-source
 - tools
 - backup
 - workflow
---

Over new years this past year I made [dura][dura]. It's like auto-backup for Git. It tries to stay out of the way
until you're in a panic, trying to figure out how to rescue your repository from a thoughtless `git reset --hard`. 
It makes background commits, real Git commits that you don't normally have to see in the log, by committing to a
different branch than the one you have checked out. Overall, it's been a blast. I've learned a lot from the 
contributors, like how to write well-formed Rust as well as a bit about [Nix][nix].

One recurring quesion has been, "why don't you just commit more"?

It's not a bad question. I clearly went through a lot of effort to build a tool in Rust. I
could've changed my own behavior. I guess it bugged me how many hours were being wasted on rescuing
repositories around the world when the answer is so easy: just commit more.

When I was considering building dura, I figured that I got myself into an unrescuable situation about 1-2 times per
year. Situations so dire that even `git reflog` couldn't save me. I rationalized that I could spend 4 days building
it and it would start saving me time in 5-6 years. That seemed worth it to me.

However, now that I've started using it, I find that I need it a lot. Like, really, A LOT!

I've never been sure how to pronounce `reflog`. It seems like it should be "ref-log", but whenever I need to use it,
it feels a lot more like "re-flog". It's painful. You can't really use it without understanding a bit about Git
internals, and honestly I wish I didn't know anything about Git internals. I just want to rescue my code.

Instead of reflog, I just expand the log to all branches, `tig --all` ([tig][tig] is great btw). Voilà! A list of
changes ordered by timestamp. Dura commits every 5 seconds, at most, so the Git log becomes a timestamp ordered log 
of every change I made regardless if I left a commit message. It's more verbose than the log I usually want to see,
but I only get it when I put it into verbose mode with the `--all` option.

I do a lot of code reviews and I frequently find myself doing something like:

1. Checkout PR branch
2. Make changes. Poke & prod the code. Run tests, etc.
3. Abandon the changes
4. Next PR, go to 1.

A lot of times I'll wish I didn't abandon the changes. I used to re-type the changes from memory, but now with dura I 
look back in the Git log, because now I'm committing a lot!

There's also been a lot of cases where I'm switching between a lot of branches, resetting, merging, etc. and I simply
get lost. I could definitely stare at the branches for a while and figure it out what happened, but Dura is a lot
easier.

If I knew how useful Dura would have been, I would've made it a lot sooner.

## Try it out!
If you're on Mac, it's [gotten very easy][pr123]. Running `brew install dura` will not only install, but also setup
a launchctl service to keep it running. I'd love to do something similar for Windows & Linux. If that's your jam,
send a PR!


 [dura]: https://github.com/tkellogg/dura
 [nix]: https://nixos.org
 [tig]: http://jonas.github.io/tig/
 [pr123]: https://github.com/tkellogg/dura/issues/123

