---
layout: post
title: "On Waiting"
date: 2023-09-14
categories:
 - management
 - programming
---

I was telling a colleague about my philosophy toward making decisions: "wait as long as you can". She
replied, "have you heard of the Chinese concept of 无为 (wu wei)?". Uh, no, I have not. She elaborated:

> In some situations, the best thing to do is not do anything but observe, let 
> whatever situation run its course. While waiting, continue to be in peace, allow for 
> transformation and growth.

This is great! Now I have a word for a concept that I've felt deeply for a while. I can't speak
authoritatively about wu wei, I just learned about it, but I can elaborate on my own philosophy:

**You're guaranteed to have more information in the future.**

Or at least the same amount. If you have to make a decision that's short on information, finding a way
to wait longer will always lead to a better decision. Obviously some decisions can't wait, this doesn't 
apply to those.

Some examples

* **"Should we adopt a preview feature from Product *X*?"** The longer you wait, the more other people will form
  opinions about it and you'll see a consensus emerge. When you revisit the decision in 6 months, you'll be
  able to avoid months of effort.
* In architecture, **"should we assume *X* can't ever happen?"** Take the path that takes less effort and
  build some light tooling to identify if you made the right decision. Adapt later.
* In designing products, **"will customers want to do *X*?"** Don't build it, but make it very easy for them
  to complain. You'll know soon.

A key component is, before you dive into waiting mode, you should have a plan for monitoring
the situation. In the preview feature example, the monitoring plan could be as simple as a calendar
reminder to check back in, or you could wait until you feel the pain more acutely. If your "waiting"
strategy is causing a lot of pain, that's a great indicator that you can't wait any longer.

