---
layout: post
title: "We need an LSP for AI"
date: 2024-10-29
categories:
 - ai
 - LLMs
 - programming
image: https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2024/02/07/07/15/station-8558516_960_720.jpg
is_draft: false
use_mermaid: false
---

It's Github Universe again, and Github announced [some new features][new] that bring it up to par with Cursor.
"Yay", I mutter to myself as I contemplate how bored I am of this.

What I really want is [Zed][zed], a hot new text editor written in Rust with first class support for collaborative
text editing. It's just so stinkin' fast, it's a complete joy to use.

It's just that Zed is lagging Cursor/Copilot in AI capabilities that are apparently now very important to me.

Maybe your hot new editor is something else. Neovim is neat. Or maybe you like old editors. Whatever your jam is,
AI text editing feels like an unexpected table-stakes feature these days, much like programming language support.

VS Code co-launched with [LSP (Language Server Protocol)][lsp]. It's a way for new text editors to support every 
language. It helped VS Code become popular, because, while not every language team was willing to do work for 
Microsoft to get VS Code support, they were willing to build a LSP server and never worry about editor support ever again.

I want the same thing with AI. Every text editor implements some AiSP (AI Server Protocol), and lots of AI vendors
differentiate by offering better AI completion services. No need to build an entire editor or fork [VS Code again][vsc].

I don't have a solution for this, and I'm not sure what exactly it would look like. But I badly want to go back
to 2022 and use whatever my favorite text editor is in the moment. I just want to code, and love it. (Sorry VS Code,
but I don't actually like you.)

 [new]: https://github.blog/changelog/2024-10-29-multi-file-editing-code-review-custom-instructions-and-more-for-github-copilot-in-vs-code-october-release-v0-22/
 [zed]: https://zed.dev/
 [lsp]: https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/
 [vsc]: https://techcrunch.com/2024/09/30/y-combinator-is-being-criticized-after-it-backed-an-ai-startup-that-admits-it-basically-cloned-another-ai-startup/
