---
layout: post
title: "htmx is composable??"
date: 2024-01-05
categories:
 - fossil
 - htmx
 - programming
image: https://gist.github.com/assets/437044/e9443c0a-823a-46f1-82b8-ccb8a13d7111
is_draft: true
use_mermaid: true
---

Have you ever observed something that seemed true, but you couldn't really explain why? I ran
into something like that recently. I wrote an app using Python + [HTMX][hx] and I noticed that
it made it very easy to develop a powerful plugin system. 

I had assumed that JSON-driven REST
APIs were the only way to make composable APIs, but HTMX tends to blend the backend and frontend
together. It seemed counterintuitive. 

Let me tell you a little about it.


# Background

Before the New Year I decided to hack on an idea. I wanted a social media client for Mastodon that
displays my feed in a way that suits me — surface the information I'm trying to track and de-prioritize
everything else. Basically the reverse of how Big Tech opimizes their algorithms.

So I spent about 3:30 hours and produced a working app using [streamlit][sl]. Streamlit was an
amazing experience, it really streamlined the proof of concept phase. After [I wrote about it][first],
someone said they liked the idea of having their own algorithm, they just didn't like what I came up with.
What a good thought! I should turn this into a pluggable framework for creating social media
algorithms!

So now my goal is to make a pluggable framework, where anyone can make their own algorithm.


# HTMX primer

The nice thing about streamlit was that it's just Python code. There's hardly even any streamlit APIs,
it mostly just stays out of the way. The problem is that it seemed nearly impossible to build a plugin
system on streamlit, for the same reasons that made it great for prototyping. I decided that the next 
closest thing is [HTMX][hx] with a [FastAPI][api] backend.

The philosophy with HTMX is that you write a **backend** app that **pushes** HTML to be displayed in
the browser.

Contrast that with real web dev, e.g. in React you write a **frontend** app that runs in the browser
and **pulls** data (JSON) into the front end application, which then renders it.

> HTMX consolidates logic on the backend

If you worked with CGI or PHP way back in the dialup age, then HTMX is gonna bring up strong 
sentimental vibes. You can think of HTMX as

1. Full page refresh for everything
2. Except when it's slow/awkward, then switch over to HTMX and just load a single `div`

In HTMX, you add non-standard HTML attibutes like `hx-post="/wham/bam"`, or `hx-swap="innerHTML"`
to buttons or links and the HTMX framwork makes it hapen. On the backend, everything returns HTML. 
When a button is clicked and it triggers a POST, you return a bit of HTML from the POST and have
HTMX sew it into the DOM.


# The Plug-in Framework

As I rewrote fossil in HTMX, I designed for a pluggable interface. The algorithm part
was easy — 3rd parties can write a Python class that implements a few abstract methods. It's all
Python, so it's pretty straightforward.

But what if someone needs a new SQL table? Like maybe they need to cache some kind of statistics
about users (e.g. topics they post about, authoritative posts, etc.). Well, they can probably just 
run `CREATE TABLE` statements in the constructor of the class. Seems fine.

<div class="mermaid">
graph LR
  subgraph server
    FastAPI
    SQLite
  end

  SQLite --> FastAPI --> HTMX
</div>

Right, but what if they want to add buttons in the UI? e.g. If a user can mark a post as belonging
to the "political nonsense" topic, then we could train a model to identify posts we don't want to see.
But that means the plugin would need to add buttons to the UI to provide that kind of feedback.

_(hold that thought)_

When I first saw Simon Wilison's [llm][llm] tool, I loved how easy it was to install plugins. Just
`pip install`. I want the same ease here too. The thing is, with components that span UI, backend and
database, that tends to be a tough sell. There's been a few frameworks that kinda pulled it off, but
they're all frontend-centric.

_(thanks for waiting)_

I noticed that with HTMX, even UI is strightforward for plugins:

1. HTML can be either verbatim strings, or template files (packaged as data files in the `*.whl`)
2. Plugins can register new FastAPI endpoints
3. Plugins can create SQLite tables

So a plugin can span the entire stack, which means you can compose a web application out of a 
moderately-sized core and a series of loosely-coupled plugins.


# My Confusion

I think of APIs like UNIX-style CLI programs — a collection of tiny parts that are easy to combine
in ways the creators never thought of. When I think of plugin systems, I think of composability,
and monoliths generally aren't composable.
HTMX is monolithic because you tend to push all program logic into the backend, all in once place.

The problem is, I wasn't comparing against just REST APIs, I was comparing against React + REST.

<div class="mermaid">
graph LR
  React-->API-->React
</div>

So, while an API might be extremely composable on it's own, the combination of React + an API isn't
just monolithic, it's a monolith split across a _distributed system_. And those are **extremly 
non-composable**.

It's further confusing, because individual React components are also very composable. But 
when you combine the requirements that I need — persistent SQL storage with custom UI elements —
you need to involve both the frontend and backend, so you're back in distributed systems land.


# Conclusion
I'm not sure what to say here except that distributed systems are hard, and for that reason,
I don't know why so many frontends are split up into non-composable distributed systems. I'm not
a full stack engineer, so maybe I'm just missing something, but it really seems like shrinking
your app to fit into the backend is probably a good idea most of the time. You can't exactly 
shrink it into the frontend, if you need database access.

I've spent a fair amount of time working with distributed systems. It's just regular programming,
just that everything is harder. Exceptions don't bubble up, errors can be indistinguishable from
latency, systems don't compose, error handling doesn't have a single best approach, even retries
are harder than they should be.

So why do fullstack engineers willingly subject themselves to this, rather than focus on building
better UIs?



 [hx]: https://htmx.org/
 [sl]: https://streamlit.io/
 [first]: https://timkellogg.me/blog/2023/12/19/fossil
 [api]: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/
 [sklearn]: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/clustering.html
 [llm]: https://llm.datasette.io/en/stable/
