---
layout: post
title: "Normware: The Decline of Software Engineering"
date: 2025-01-02
categories:
 - ai
 - llms
 - engineering
 - future-of-work
 - no-code
 - automation
 - career-advice
image: https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2024/12/05/11/17/fishing-9246365_1280.jpg
is_draft: false
use_mermaid: false
banner: |
    Attention! I've [updated my views](/blog/2025/05/10/ai-code-updated).
---

There's a common refrain that "AI won't replace software engineers", often with the resolution,
"you'll be replaced by software engineers that use AI", implying that AI will be used to make
software engineers more productive and efficient. I argue that software engineers will be
replaced by [normies][def], non-engineers (accountants, lawyers, etc.) that are empowered to
create their own software to solve their own problems.

I don't think that we're close to automating software engineering. 
But what if we simply _**didn't need**_ software engineers? 

I envision a world where AI tools & no code tools enable normies to create, _normware_, 
software created by anyone to solve their own problems. To some extent, it's been happening 
for decades. But now it's possible to easily make good normware.

First, let's start at the beginning.

## Are You Valuable If You Don't Write Code?
There are a lot of job disciplines that write code but aren't software engineers. The first 
non-engineer coder I
worked with was a computational linguist. He was a linguist, definitely not a software engineer,
but he did write a lot of Python. I also worked with a game artist, who was clearly an artist,
but whose medium was code (and visual design). I've since worked with dozens of professions that
are comfortable writing code but aren't software engineers.

At Amazon, I was introduced to the idea that principal software engineers don't write any code.
Principal engineers would publically lament that they write so little code that they likely
aren't even capable of writing production code.

That made me think _a lot_. I had always defined myself by my ability to write code. But I was
a senior software engineer, and it appeared that all paths upward involved _not_ writing code.
It shook me.

Today, I'm seeing a similar phenomenon with AI coding. Software engineers of all levels are wrestling
with what their value is. If it's not writing code, what do we do?


## Why Hire A Software Engineer?
Without talking directly about all the things a software engineer does, why are we hired in
the first place?

1. _**Big Projects**_ — I've seen business folk prototype a solution, but eventually get to the
    point where further development is too difficult to do themselves. Sofware engineers bring
    in things like design patterns and unit tests that allow projects to grow even larger.
2. _**Distribution**_ — Similarly, after prototyping a solution, how can people use it? e.g.
    web app, Excel spreadsheet on a SharePoint server, mobile app.
3. _**Scale**_ — How many users? Any top level internet site, like Google or Facebook, has
    gotten huge and it's very complicated to operate at this scale. They hire legions of software
    engineers and publically declare that their success hinges on the quality of engineers they hire.
4. _**Maintenance**_ — Software engineers have lore about how software is alive. An untouched
    application will eventually inexplicably break. In fact, some engineers will brag that a
    piece of software they wrote has run untouched in production for 20 years. That brag only
    carries weight because it's unusual, most software inexplicably breaks without maintenance.
5. _**Safety**_ — In some cases, often real-time embedded devices, human health & safety is at
    risk and software engineers are hired to *take responsibility* for the quality and integrity.

None of those things are inherently about writing code. _So why do I think software engineering
is disappearing?_


## An Experiment: Storymode
Over the holidays I hacked together a web app that I dubbed [storymode][gh]. I wanted Claude 
to write stories & convert them into audiobooks to occupy my kids for multiple 10 hour road trips.

The catch: _**I didn't write it**_. I made a rule for myself, I used [Cursor's][cur] Composer with the
new [Agent Mode][agent]. Not only did I not write code, _**I didn't even read it**_. I *blindly accepted*
every change without review.

And it worked! With only a couple exceptions, I was able to write an entire web app that _**solved
my problem**_, and did so soley in English prose. A couple of times I ran into [doom loops][doom] and
had to manually intervene. But that's happening less and less as models & dev tools get smarter.


## Normware: Solve Your Own Problem
We're clearly at a juncture with software and software engineering. The debate is where we're going.
It's hard to imagine that software will remain unchanged in five years. I think **the production of
software will move toward it's users.**

Why? Simple economics.

I call this _**normware**_, the software that [normies][def] write to solve their own problems.
Think about how good dev tools are in relation to, say, the software used submit expense reports.
Dev tools are good because they're made by the same people who experience the problem. On the other
extreme, in enterprise software the buyers & users are different people; it's notorious for being
difficult to use.

Minimize the distance between developer & user. The bigger the distance, 
the harder it will be to get right.

Normware is that, but taken to the limit. It's the minimum possible distance between developer and user.
For everything.


## Hybrid Roles Reduce Communication Overhead
If you've watched software engineering develop over the decades, you'll notice that this pattern
has already been playing out on repeat. _Group A_ and _group b_ have diverging skill sets and a
lot of time & energy is wasted by having them miscommunicate, so instead we'll create
_group AB_ that has both skill sets.

Reducing distance increases effectiveness:

* _Dev Ops_ = development + operations
* _Full stack_ = frontend + backend dev
* _ML engineers_ = data scientist + engineer
* _DataOps_ = data engineer + operations
* _DevSecOps_ = development + security + operations
* _Tech evangelist_ = developer + marketer
* _Legal technologist_ = lawyer + software developer
* _Game artist_ = game developer + artist
* _Computational linguist_ = linguist + developer
* _Bioinformatics engineer_ = biologist + data scientist

The list gets longer as the years go by, because it is _**desireable**_ to reduce communication
overhead. Yes, communication is good, but even better is not needing to communicate. And someone
who can think clearly in two domains is infinitely more useful than two people that can't 
communicate.

The obvious downside is that these hybrid roles tend to be not quite as proficient at either of the
pre-combined roles, but the business prefers them anyway because they deliver the _right thing_ at
a much higher rate.


## The Curse of Scale (The Problem Solved By Normware)
My hottest take of all is that **product managers** are neither _group A_ nor _group B_. Maybe they
started as a software engineer, but when they become a PM they're disallowed from writing software.
Or maybe they were a subject matter expert, but when they become a PM, they're disallowed from 
continuing to practice their expertise, so skill atrophies.

Worst of all, product managers are pushed by upper management to make _**big ideas**_ that push
the product into the market leader position. But in pursuit of big ideas, they lose touch with the
original mission.

This is an artifact of scale. 

When software becomes a product, it _needs_ users. Prior to being a product, it simply _had_
users. As it continues to live as a product, it needs _growth_ in users. To achieve growth,
it needs to cater to new groups of users, and in the process it caters fewer of the original users,
because it's difficult to serve a diverse user base.

Cory Doctorow's [enshittification][shit] is a special case of this effect that addresses what
happens to a two-sided marketplace as it scales.

Scale always creates problems. In distributed systems, [cellular architecture][cell] was created
to **artificially reduce the scale** of traffic. Engineers at AWS created the architecture after realizing
that new problems always continue to emerge as scale increases. 

Similar to cellular architecture,
_normware constrains scale_, which makes it fundamentally simpler for new solutions to emerge and thrive.


## Normware Doesn't Need Software Engineers
Normware is inherently a lot smaller and simpler, and thus can largely avoid the overhead caused by scale.

1. _**Small Projects**_ — They solve only one problem at a time, and rewrite when it gets complex.
2. _**Distribution**_ — Little to no distribution infrastructure, e.g. maybe they run a webapp on their laptop
    or use a no-code platform.
3. _**Small scale**_ — They make it for their friends or immediate team. 
4. _**Maintenance**_ — Still needs to be maintained, but it's small so AI tooling is a viable option.

Normware doesn't need software engineers. AI dev tools may be good enough for normies to solve their own
problems and maintain their own solutions. After storymode, I'm convinced of this.

## Normware Dev Tooling
What kinds of software do normies use to create normware?

* _**MS Excel**_ — The classic normware. Accountants and business people have created spreadsheets to solve
    their own problems for years. The UI isn't great, so I think this will steadily be replaced by other
    options
* _**[Cursor][cur] & [Windsurf][ws]**_ — Code editors with heavy AI enablement. It's more formidable to get
    started, but there's virtually no upper bound to what you can make.
* _**[UIPath][uipath] & RPA software**_ — These tools let you directly automate a mouse-driven point-and-click
    workflow on your computer. From what I hear, UIPath is investing heavily in AI & computer vision.
    Claude's [computer use][comp] tools will give UIPath stiff competition, and lots of other options
    will soon emerge.
* _**[Custom GPTs][gpt] & [MS Copilot][cop]**_ — A great way to integrate data sources into your workflow.
    These are essential no-code AI tools for making your data very useful to others.

It's not necessarily about replicating what software engineers do, it's just about solving
your own problems.


## Normware Will Become Dominant
My hot take here is _**NOT**_ that businesses _**want**_ their reserachers, accountants, lawyers, etc. solving their
own problems. Businesses always have wanted that. 
I can name more than 5 teams I've worked on that were started by a prototype made by a normie & a spreadsheet. 
Thus far normware only rationalized the need for increased software engineering investment. 

The hot take is that normware can be **developed & maintained by _normies_**. 

While working on [storymode][gh] it struck me that anyone can do this. The main reason why they don't, is
because _**they don't know they can**_. It's just an education problem.


## Software Engineers Will Still Have Jobs
I do think software engineers will be able to weather this fine.

1. Societal change is slow, you have years to redefine yourself
2. Normware isn't always appropriate, e.g. when health & safety is at risk
3. Existing software will always need to be maintained (e.g. there's still [800B lines of COBOL in use today][cobol]).
4. Normware depends on non-normware software platforms like Cursor or MS Excel


But regardless, you need to expand yourself.

Traditionally, software engineers formed a tight knit pod and isolated from the rest of the business.
We had enough jargon and inside jokes that we could sustain our own parallel culture. That's unlikely 
to continue. 

Make friends with the sales guys and generally branch out.



 [gh]: https://github.com/tkellogg/storymode
 [cur]: https://www.cursor.com/
 [agent]: https://medium.com/@ashinno43/cursor-v0-43-3-with-composer-agent-is-insane-d770dc5b61ea
 [doom]: https://bsky.app/profile/timkellogg.me/post/3lechcszzys2t
 [ws]: https://codeium.com/windsurf
 [prev]: /blog/2024/07/26/hackathons
 [cell]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/wellarchitected/latest/reducing-scope-of-impact-with-cell-based-architecture/what-is-a-cell-based-architecture.html
 [shit]: https://doctorow.medium.com/social-quitting-1ce85b67b456
 [uipath]: https://www.uipath.com/
 [comp]: https://www.anthropic.com/news/3-5-models-and-computer-use
 [gpt]: https://help.openai.com/en/articles/8554397-creating-a-gpt
 [cop]: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/ai/?ef_id=_k_Cj0KCQiAj9m7BhD1ARIsANsIIvAd25RlWyavEByJAd0VQ_enqtsvFobp7kEhjfkTJt83Cv22Ln7rcY8aAqjEEALw_wcB_k_&OCID=AIDcmm1o1fzy5i_SEM__k_Cj0KCQiAj9m7BhD1ARIsANsIIvAd25RlWyavEByJAd0VQ_enqtsvFobp7kEhjfkTJt83Cv22Ln7rcY8aAqjEEALw_wcB_k_&gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQiAj9m7BhD1ARIsANsIIvAd25RlWyavEByJAd0VQ_enqtsvFobp7kEhjfkTJt83Cv22Ln7rcY8aAqjEEALw_wcB
 [def]: https://www.reddit.com/r/INTP/comments/13o66tq/what_exactly_qualifies_someone_as_a_normie/
 [cobol]: https://cobolcowboys.com/cobol-today/
