---
layout: post
title: "MCP Demystified"
date: 2025-03-06 09:00:00 +0000
categories:
 - ai
 - llms
 - engineering
 - agents
 - mcp
 - protocols
 - integrations
 - analogies
image: https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2015/09/03/17/50/cobweb-921039_1280.jpg
# social_image: /images/bash-v-powershell.png
is_draft: false
use_mermaid: true
---

[MCP][mcp] is all over my socials today, to the extent that every 4th post is about it. What's MCP and why
should you care? Here I'll rattle off a bunch of [analogies][anal], you can choose what works for 
you and _disregard the rest_.

## Analogy: API Docs For LLMs
_**Where it works:**_ Say you have an API that requests a contract draft from Liz every time the API 
is called. The MCP server tells the LLM how to call your API. It has a name, description, when it should
be used, as well as parameters and also general prompt engineering concerns to elicit a reliable tool call.

_**Where it breaks:**_ MCP also covers the details of how to call your API


## Analogy: It's What the GPT Store Should Have Been
_**Where it works:**_ Custom GPTs were often used for invoking APIs and tools, but you were limited to one
single tool. You would've had to open a "Request Contract" GPT in order to invoke your API. With MCP you'd be
able to have _**any**_ chat open and simply connect the "Request Contract" MCP server. In both cases, the LLM
is still responsible for invoking your API. It's dramatically better, because now the LLM can use 
**all your APIs**.

_**Where it breaks:**_ It's pretty good. It's a different paradigm and a lot more technical,
so many people probably don't vibe with it.

## Analogy: LSP (Language Server Protocol) for LLMs
_**Where it works:**_ [LSP][lsp] & MCP both solve the many-to-many problem. For LSP it's IDEs vs programming
languages. For MCP it's LLM clients (e.g. ChatGPT, Cursor or an agent) vs tools/APIs/applications/integrations.

_**Where it breaks**_: It's pretty good. The actual integrations feel a bit more fluid in MCP because so
much of it is natural language, but that's the essence.


## Analogy: Power Tools for AI
_**Where it works:**_ Power tools have a lot of standard interfaces, like you can put any drill bit into
any drill. Also, many power tools have very similar user interfaces, e.g. a hand drill and a circular saw
both have a trigger.

_**Where it breaks:**_ This one feels like a bit of a stretch, but it does convey a sense of being able to
combine many tools to complete a job, which is good.


# MCP Server Ideas
There are a lot of existing [MCP servers][servers], including, Gitub, Google Maps, Slack, Spotify (play a song),
PostgreSQL (query the database), and Salesforce. Some others that could be:

* Browser use (load a page & click around)
* Microsoft 365 (I'd love to get an org chart in an LLM)
* Wikis & documentation
* YouTube 
* Email (mainly searching & reading, but also maybe sending, 🤔 maybe)


# FAQ: How do I integrate MCP into my enterprise?
You would choose a LLM [chat tool][chat] that supports MCP and then configure and connect [MCP servers][servers].
I'd imagine you'd want to connect your wiki, Salesforce, maybe a few CRM systems. At the moment, heavy enterprise
integration would require your IT department slinging some code to build MCP servers.

It's an Anthropic project, so Anthropic tools all have great support, whereas OpenAI and Microsoft are going to
shun it for as long as possible. But servers are easy to create, expect community servers to pop up.


# FAQ: Why?
Universal integrations into AI. All you have to do to get your company into the buzz is wrap your API in
an MCP server, and suddenly your app can be used by all MCP clients (Claude, Cursor, agents, etc.)


# FAQ: What if BIGCO X develops a cometitor? Who will win?
The one that has more users. It's a protocol. Which is better has little to do with it, it's all about which
has the biggest network effects. I'd bet on MCP because it was released months ago and there's a ton of
buzz around it still.

# FAQ: IDK it still seems hard
Okay, maybe a diagram helps

Servers on left; clients on right. Redraw the arrows however you want.

<div class="mermaid">
graph LR
Slack-->Claude["Claude app"]
Slack-->Cursor
Slack-->Code["Claude Code (coding agent)"]
Salesforce-->Claude
Spotify-->Claude
Github-->Claude
Github-->Cursor
Github-->Code
SQL-->Code
Sharepoint-->Claude
</div>



 [anal]: https://bsky.app/profile/timkellogg.me/post/3ljklqlwilk2q
 [mcp]: https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction
 [lsp]: https://langserver.org/
 [servers]: https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/servers
 [chat]: https://github.com/daodao97/chatmcp
